Jonathan Crary actually got a bfa as his first degree where he studied film and photography

does not tackel both sides but intesifies the penetrating forms in which capitalism is incorporated into our lives. He portrays a relentless overview of how capitalism is imbedded into society and how the HEAT is on, ALL the time.

what would happen in a world thats switched on, all the time.

a planet with no down time, living systems, deprived of an ability for restoration, recupuration and renewal.

always being turned on seperates us from one another from the colonization of conciousness. american consumer culture in an extreme, we are always following our own desires, and invoking a singular autonomy seperate from a community.

Crary talks about an unexamined assumomption that social media will persist. That it is "here to stay." And the only reason they exist is because of mega corporations and the elite billionares.If change is happening and these digital social spaces do not persist communial non-hierarchical human behaviour within communities will start to exist more. Neoliberal capitalism denies places / countried to be self-persistant.  

To scorch something is not to completely destory or burn something up, its to singe a surface in such a way that color is eradicated. Color in this way becomes broader and depics an affect of what gives our life meaning, the connection to the natural world, to eachother, of youth.

Crary sees the scorched earth as a loss of color, vibrancy drained, in a metaphorical sense. What gives life color? The scorched earth is renewal of the earth as it once was, the living human world, of youth is lost and becomes difficult to repair.

Digital technologies and social media is the closing down of the ways in which you build a world in partnership with the people you love.

Inevitability that this is just the way things are.

Scorched earth read our future, the world in decay amongst a dystopic internet landscape

Scorched earth is reality. A raveged and plundered earth. An unrestorable earth. An uninhabitable earth. A veiled earth. 

Every sense the human possesses has been analyzed, interfered with, and commodified. What we recognize to be human gets replaced by machine tools, the internet complex, the homogenization of behaviours and thinking.

Apocolyptic, the after, the futures if we have one

A future offline is our redemption

Silently experiencing

"the internet complex is the implacable engine of addiction, loneliness, false
hopes, cruelty, psychosis, indebtedness, squandered life, the corrosion of memory, and social disintegration."

"The internet complex has become inseparable from the immense,
incalculable scope of 24/7 capitalism and its frenzy of accumulation,
extraction, circulation, production, transport, and construction, on a global
scale."

Artificially manufactured appetites

Fueled by artificially manufactured appetites, the speed and ubiquity of digital networks maximize the incontestable priority of --

-- getting, having, coveting, resenting, envying; --

-- all of which furthers the deterioration of the world—a world
operating without pause, without the possibility of renewal or recovery,
choking on its heat and waste.

Hegels horizon of autonomy and recognition for everyone // but instead history is rendered unreal and incomprehensible, memory is disabled and we absorb lived temporalities

social significance is attributed to immediacy. 

eternity of noisy insignificance, immediate immediately afterwards, replacement, 

Crary speaks about a digital commons that once was an idea had never actually existed and never will.

The internet seemed to provide popular or democratic access to information actually is used to break up local and regional communities, to dominate a larger sphere where knowledge is monopolized and maintained

The internet like the TV in the 1970s had a narrative of naive enthusiasm , but quickly becomes a capture of time, about disempowerment and depersonalized connectedness. 

Rarely subjugated groups ever effectively appropriate communications media for their own political ends.

a digital diversion acts as deterrent to anti-systemic mass movements.

pg.24 possibilities wiped out

"As Enrique Dussel and others have argued,
we are now in the last stages, not just of capitalism, but of the entire European world-system that has been in place for nearly 500 years, based on the exploitation and murder of non-European peoples and the natural world. The internet complex, as the new modality of planetary administration, is an indispensable part of the defensive strategy to maintain the world system, to resist decolonization and de-Westernization." pg. 25

Social media as implantation

capitalism putting forward a model of material abundance that is structually impossible to achieve

"North America is on the literal and symbolicperiphery of an emerging post-Western planet. As Dussel insists, the defeat of this world-system with its threat to the survival of all life is now the single greatest task of humanity.^21" pg. 26

pg. 29 "Belittlement" the internet becomes an intensification of this. In seeking antidotes to belittlement, Unger observes that we fall into “the sleepwalking of compromise, conformity and the petrified self. We seiz eupon devices and stratagems that divide and enslave us under the pretext ofempowering us.”25

terms like "virtual" or "cloud" veil material and environmental realities, such as data centers and server farms that have staggering energy requirements and consume millions of gallons of water each day

neocolonial operations like these endanger people and their lands and put the world at a vanquishing extreme

The idea of a permenant war pervades, and thinkers abandon hopeful visions of technologies imagined to transform society. Because these technologies became integrated into the operations of corporation & military.


Open pit mining dwarfs comparable activity during the industrial revolution or during the twentieth century, with over 500K active quarries and pits employing 45 million people.

-- Grasberg mine in Indonesian province of Papua
Copper mine in Mt. Toromocho

where acid runoff and tailings are dumped into local rivers & lakes

capitalist cannibalization of the planet in the service of prolonging the imploding "digital age." -- pg. 31/32 

our warped lives call for 24/7 energy and for unnecessary products and services that quite literally poison the earth.

The idea and restructuring of reality around the metaphor of the machine. The idea of seperation between nature and humanity has gained acceptance and has been reinforced. Social customs and behaviours that interlace humans with animals, insects, plants, forests, rivers, were eliminated or marginalized.

pg 34 line 10 <i> Lifeworld </i> only exists now, in fragmants. 

a lifeworld describes a social rhythm, the alteration of seasons, phases of the moon, migration of birds, the oscillation of day and night, of sleep and waking, the sequence of festivals

"Scorched earth" idea pg. 36

Capitalism places on it's subjects the uncertainty of social existence, the precariousness of life and work is a fundamental systemic goal.

The internet is the digital counterpart of the vast, a rapidly expanding garbage patch, something in which we are permenantly submerged

The possibility of dialogue is crowded out because of an immense agglomeration of data

Jurgen Habermas argued that language was consitutive of the lifeworld, and was hopeful that new forms of media will support consensus-based communication would occur between "responsible actors." Forty years later we see that an unlikely outcome is close to being realized, with a constant stream of deception, distortion, and programmed unintelligibility and duplicity. [ memes? ]

"Abstract Space" Is a homogenous zone.

Before abstract space we have a forest, vagaries of light, shadows, uncertain distances, and the impenetrable abundance of living matter. Historically, Abstract space is not only a flattened plane, but an environment conquered. Abstract space is the cutt off of supply to an opposing source, an environment that's been eliminated.

Social environments are now Abstract Space. Anything unique or resistand made exchangeable. The scorched-earth reality of abstract space is a world made uninhabitable and unrestorable.

-- Simone Weil 1943 on Uprootedness 

The spiritual crisis of "uprootedness" as the dominance of a money economy . To be uprooted was to be denied "real, active and natural participation in the life of a community." pg. 45

She emphasized that one can remain geographically stationary and yet become torn away from a shared connection to the past or mutually nurtured expectations for the future.--

SEGMENT : people and what they think vs whats actually happening

-- /Charles Lyell/ widely know for his claim that significant geological changes occured only over immense spans of time. 

building on the idea of "deep time"

deep time meaning earths history is so vast it cannot be be fully experienced by human lifetime

Lyell saw the terrestrial environment as passive and impervious to human intervention. The earth and it's structures becaome distanced and objectified, to be studied and contemplated. 

Dissapearences of polar ice sheets within human lifespan would have been unimaginable for him. -- 

Is anything "here to stay"

He talks about a cybernetic paradigm

the subjects as an infinite feedback loop, a fleshless envelope, the dispossession of thought and the evaporation of using ones own will

the colonizing of every aspect of humant existence and nature itself.

the management of consumption habits, compliant individuals,

the ambitions of corporations to propell the integration of human biology with information technology

language data supports a legitimate claim to presence in the world

--a utopic vision and our dystopic reality are compared

According to the technocratic futurists of the mid-twentieth century, we should by now be thriving in gleaming, poverty-free cities connected by high-speed rail, surrounded by material abundance from automated factories, and taking vacations on Mars. Instead we are living amid decay and fatal disrepair: jetliners crashing because of cutbacks on safety features, water systems poisoned, failing power grids, petrochemical plants exploding, sea level rise threatening nuclear reactors and much else.--

The internet complex struggles to conceal its dependence on rapidly deteriorating world of industrial capitalism

Crary says that these theorists, philosphers, thinkers that once proposed high hopes for the future of social and internet technologies systems  will never see significant restoration or replacement of all the now broken infrastructure put into place in the twentieth century.

The actuality of a world made into a terminal waste dump by technoscience

it is
intrinsic to the operations of scorched earth capitalism.

Philosopher Jean-Pierre Dupuy “anyone who believes that science and technology will manage to provide a solution to problems created by science and technology, does not believe in the reality of the future.” Science and technology being an ongoing assault on the life-world

Science participates in the ongoing idea of human life turning into a computational model for data processing and capital accumulation

The scorch earthed as stripping the finite life of the human away, as the finiteness of life is what has given meaning, passion and purpose to our existence, and to the ways we love and depend on others.

the voraciousness of capitalism is extinguishing human values or beliefs

pg.62 about death :: 

Through some cosmic anomaly, an unstoppable process of crystallization has begun in the forest, transforming every living thing, including people, into beautiful but inert matter. "Immunity from time"

Magical thinking centralized arround schemes for becoming wealthy. The internet complex adopting occult economies and the emtions impelling them. Lotterly-like possibilities for riches become quantifiable on the internet, and many cling to that conviction. In reality the digital self is less likely to obtain such a channeling of wealth, instead you contribute to the pockets of a larger station.

The speed of computational resources of advanced technologies propells the billionaire class, they are structurally interconnceted with the internet complex. The intergration and relocation of the social, economic and personale life to online systems and platforms has aided in the upward transfer of wealth.

Why wouldn't the people be incited to be on screen 24/7 when every aspect of  your existense from a gesture to a gaze can be monetized. 

Crary goes on to say that the techno-modernists aim to replace every aspect of human warmth, spontaneity, and relationships with apps and digital simulations. And that the internet complex is is about a compensation for the unavailability of nostalgic and sentimental practices that technology took from us.

Our lives funnel into protocols of digital networks.
The humanness we all share, from love, to friendship, community, compassions, etc dissapears or becomes into depleted simulation. Permeated with absence and shallowness. 

There is an ongoing colonization of consciousness, the homogenization of experience

A lifeworld that has been lost is face to face assembly, techno-modernists see no use if exchanges produce no data that can be extracted and instantly put to use.

The face-to-face is an immersion, an inhabiting of an atmospherics, a meeting that is a breathing together. It is not occuring in empty space, bounded by frame. 

Personally I've found that most of my human exchanges are in fact companied by links, images, sounds, and text, things that are mostly not present in the face-to-face. The encounter online between us is now derivitive of a chimera body, a cyborg body that embodies much more, but is filtered in a way and can be paused, muted, postponed, spontaneously disconnected. 

Crary talks about a body monitored, and analysed. 
The quantified self, the psychology of a mind and body, the things that used to be interiour are now obtainable from external procedures,technologies, and method.

The human body is constantly being studied and optimized by digital technologies research into eye movement and interaction behiaviours, attention study

User experience design is a huge industry and aims to draw emotional responses to websites, and interactive designs on the internet

human engagement that seems persuasive, manipulative

frictionless, effortless, smooth
magical & meaningful payment experiences

Here, “frictionless” is a synonym for the
absence of reflection, thought, or doubt. pg.81

I also think about how these jobs such as UX design and UI design are obtainable jobs for artists and how some artists get syphoned in-to such occupations because of financial security and not realizing they are contributing to a specific faccet of the internet complex

Experience design, experience happening not in, but because of an environemt. Experience in the sense of a communion, a ritual.

These streams of stimuli that alter our experience are placed upon us non censensually

eye tracking parallels the relation between hunter and hunted

the term eye-catching reveals this fact

The eye has cultural meaning and significance and is the defining element of the human face-to-face encounter. A shared gaze always holds the promise of a glimpse of iridescence, whether between friends, lovers, or strangers. I think about how eye contact is not the same as it was before. In online meetings with friends,colleagues,teachers, etc eye contact doesn't work the same way. The camera that captures us is not what we look at, we look at one person while we talk to another, we look at images while we speak. I think about eye contact and flirting and how flirtation takes different forms when meeting with other on online platforms. 
The "intimate vision" between two eyes making contact through gaze does not happen in online spaces. The eye is mediated between camera and screen.

the estrangement of senses by the heighetened amount of cgi images we encounter. easily accessed highly magnified photos that are drained of anything experienced or lived. This reminds me of a recent photo that's been viral on the internet of a magnified ant face. I saw a lot of funny comments about how their face looked, some people now want to stomp them even more after seeing their "true face" even though this vision is something we would have never experienced otherwise. To me that face is something of another world, not to be experienced on our scale. The space between us so large that it's incomprehensable.

Because of advertising and social media visions we see the face only in phases of likeability. The "complex personhood" is lost.

The face that once was about uniqueness, experiencing of others, and understanding has become oppressive in the internet complex. 
Facial recognition erases and opposes the living face of suffering, the destitute, and the non-white amongst dominant forms of spectacle and celebrity cultures. Deep loss, sorrow, love, and perserverance does not exist and is not recognized by the machine due to the wreckage of social formations.

The complex personhood gone

The meeting, the glance "lives in the space of events." every living situation has a new face that has never been and will never come again

Agamben singles out the debasement of the face as one of the ways in which language is disfigured and empties of it's social efficacy. 

“The face is the only location of community ... the face’s
revelation is revelation of language itself.”28

Now, twenty-five years since these reflections, there is no limit on the extent to which the gaze, the voice, and the face can be split off from social spaces and interpersonal association. They are made into objects of monitoring and analysis for a variety of purposes and uses, but the overriding goal is the smoother assimilation of humans into machine systems and operations, a goal that requires the narrowing and standardization of our reactions to people, events, and exchanges of many kinds.

Corporate-designed forms of social media have eliminated the possibility of an ethical relation to otherness and affliction. In numerous ways, we are induced or compelled to follow the routines of digital work and leisure and to align ourselves with their mediocrity and mindlessness.

We acquiesce out of passivity or convenience, and over time we
come to have thoughts and gestures that are no longer our own.

The loss of the encounter
"The lonely crowd"
public space was still latently charged with the unexpected or unforeseen, with possibilities of chance occurrences, meetings, or conversations which are now increasingly closed off.

The psychopathology of today’s cellularization of public space was
anticipated by Eugène Minkowski’s clinical research of the 1930s, in which he characterized pervasive forms of mental illness as “a loss of vital contactwith reality.”31

More explicitly, he saw this condition as a loss of the
capacity for sympathy, “which is the most natural and most human aspect of our lives.” In the undamaged individual, he wrote, sympathy surrounds all our perceptions like “a living fringe” that allows our responses to life with others to be “supple, malleable and human.” The vibrancy of that fringe, of that awareness, both sensory and ethical, of the world at the periphery of whatever we may be doing is jeopardized by daily immersion in self-interested and privatized pursuits.

Neautralizing of sympathy

This non recogniziton of human recognizing of human is when society breaks down. Collective space marked by indifference to the proximity of others is the scorched earth disaster. A world no longer shared. 

Crary goes on to say that there needs to be a radical rethinking of what our needs are, that techniques of subsistence and the fostering of community need to be recovered and adapted for the present, especially from cultures in the Global South and indigenous peoples. New ways of living. Rediscovering our desired beyond the flood of shallow cravings that are promoted. 

Capitalism is still being held together by individuals clinging to seperateness, their privacy, their freedom from other selves, and their fear of anything communal. The internet complex continues to produce solitary subjectivities, to deter cooperative formats and associations, and to dissolve possibilities for reciprocity and collective responsibility.